With you this afternoon on your petition.
Um, so we'll give you an opportunity to introduce it
and then if you'll allow us some time
for questions, uh, that'd be appreciated. Over to you.
Thank you. Hello everyone.
My name is the petitioner.
Thank you for your invite
and being here to hear my oral sub mission today.
I assume you all have read my written sub mission carefully
and watched the video of the Minister of Immigration,
Eric Stanford, talking about the parent resident visa
EOI issue and my petition.
So today I won't repeat the supporting evidence
and the data I already provided,
but only highlight the key points
to leave time for q and a.
First, I would like
to highlight this issue at the broader country level,
the CHE long-term fiscal statement 2025
and the stated
that migration has delayed the agent pressures
a unsaid hero article analyzed
that treasure's projections rely on another million
new immigrants arriving in New Zealand
for the next 25 years
to push the population up to 6.7 million.
Then the immigration master stay high
to get the population to 7.4 million
by 2065 to keep debt down
to only 200% of GDP.
This should be clear evidence that
migrants are very important to the New Zealand economy.
I would like you all to think about two questions.
One, how are you going to make New Zealand more attractive
to compete with other countries in the world?
Two, what kind of migrants do you want to attract
and retain for New Zealand?
Second, I would like
to highlight this issue at the individual level.
The negative impacts on these sponsors,
which were ignored when the policy was changed in
2022.
Those sponsors are highly skilled with high incomes
feeling critical skill shortage,
paying significant taxes.
I think this group of sponsors are exactly
the migrants you would like to attract and retain.
However, our wellbeing is neglected
because the current EOI setting
are not reasonable
and it's not fit for purpose,
especially the balance system made it inaccessible,
which is mentally torturing us.
Some of the sponsors have already left in certain
because they were too desperate to wait any longer
with more sponsors are planning to leave.
If no improvements are made to the policy soon,
I don't think you would like to see us leaving
New Zealand, leaving New Zealand to go to Australia,
our home countries,
which will drive the New Zealand branching.
Further in the MBI document,
which listed the benefits that the parent
category offers to New Zealand.
Item 43 stated
for some migrants the potential to sponsor parents
influenced their decision to immigrate to New Zealand
and they were unlikely to have come here
if their parents had not been able to join them.
You must have read my personal story
and how most sponsors who
ated the EIS were misled
by the Immigration New Zealand information
missed out on the old queue,
which a hundred percent would have been selected
by November, 2023, almost two years ago.
Now we are still suffering in the ballot,
so we respectfully
request the Minister of Immigration
to instruct Immigration New Zealand
to make an extra selection immediately
for all the ated UIs, approximately 2000
as a remedy and give us
the wasted 2,708 quotas back.
Third, I would like
to highlight this issue at applicant's level.
They raised the sponsors whom have been
contributing enormous like to New Zealand
and living far away from them.
They wanted to live with the sponsors together, help
to look after their grandchildren, provide physical
and emotional support.
More than 70% of
the applicants age under 70,
they were needed to pass medical examinations
before the resident visas get approved anyway.
So to ensure they are healthy.
If you allow them to come to live in New Zealand as soon
as possible, they are still healthy
and young enough to contribute to the New Zealand society
directly and
indirectly as they get older.
They need to be more dependent on sponsors
to live with dignity
and the love in a supportive family environment.
Unlike other resident category
with Bella system like
the Pacific access category
or Samoa quota, our parents cannot try luck
with another country like Australia
because their children live in New Zealand.
This reunification is not just
nice to have, it's a basic human need.
It's our fundamental value
and responsibility to give back to our parents
and look
after them, take care of them, especially for those
who are only child.
We wanna change. We urge the Minister
of Immigration to start the review
of the re current resident visa policy settings immediately
rather than later off the year
and into next year with the law proposed solution.
One, remove the two year expiry.
If you must make the EIS expire every two years,
then please illustrate waive the reapplication fee.
Two, change the balance system back to the Q system
and select EOIs based on the original date of sub mission
for more certainty failed and transparency.
If you decided to keep the balance,
then please let select more than 90%
of EOIs based on the order of
original date of sub mission each time.
Then run a bonus draw
for less than 10% from the unselected remaining UIs in
the same pool.
Three increased annual cap back to 5,500 visas
on behalf of the one
15,427 sponsors in the Bay.
By end of July, I want you to truly say us,
this group of people who have been suffering,
hear us, feel us, care about us,
save us from the pain.
Use your authority, power,
and inference to help us solve the problem.
Now the government made a commitment
to review the settings, but it has been delayed.
We are still waiting. As the chairperson of the committee,
Kyle, can you please help us
to make the commitment fulfilled?
Thank you from the bottom of my heart.
Thank you very much. Um, Sophie,
there's a few questions I'm gonna start with Grant McCullum.
Yeah. Um, thank, thank you very much for your, um, your,
your presentation petition obviously went a lot of effort.
That's, uh, great work.
Uh, just curious,
so when the previous Labor League government decided
to change a ballot process in 2023,
do you know if any consultation was carried out
with the migrant communities at
The time? Based on my
research, there was not.
There wasn't. Okay. Um, so have you had the opportunity
to find out why there was no consultation?
I think at that time, reading all the MBIE documents,
there was so much call, well,
I'm not the first one making petition about the category.
Then we made a decision to reopen it.
It was back in July, 2000, uh, 22,
and then announced that the change in the start
selection in October, 2022, our first selection,
November, 2022 for the queue.
So I believe at that time to push it out there was
for the time saving
or something, there was no consultation being conducted.
Okay, thank you. Helen. What
I, this is a big issue in my electorate in Mount Albert
and I've heard from constituents about it even this week.
So I I just wanted to say I, I do hear you
and I do hear that there's a lot
of torture in what's going on at the
moment, the communities.
Hmm. What I wanna know is whether you've had discussions
with the minister and what she has said she is doing
about this at this point.
At the, she acknowledged that this is a problem.
Also the video which I linked on from YouTube, she
promised that she will start the review of the parent
resident visa after she completes the skilled micro
category and the change
of the skilled micro category was announced on
23rd of September.
I reached out to her again yesterday to invite her
to attend the oral submission.
She refuse
and she said it's not appropriate for her to be here.
And I asked her to confirm if the review
of parent resident visa has been started yet, well
should I say her Spokeperson
or of official said
Because the skilled migrant category work was also
take longer than she expected,
which at on 1st of July she said it would,
it would take her a month or so.
So which count from
that date now it's more than three months.
And she said it has taken even longer.
So she said not yet.
And she said we'll start shortly, but I don't know when.
That's the thing. I think the timeline keep changing. Yes.
Even in my recent submission stuff,
journalist reached out to her
and her office March of this year, already said at that time
they were doing the review but wasn't.
And then later, after the 1st of July,
the conversation in person, her announcements was,
it will be later this year, which now coming to the end
of the year, I hope it's not getting delayed again
because really it's so many people suffering. Mm-hmm.
Yeah. Got time for very quick final question. Pji. Yeah.
So this is about the two year expiry on applications.
Uh, so because people's circumstances can change while
they're in the, in the system, you know,
whether it's ballot at the moment, it's ballot system.
So what do you think we can do to ensure,
because sometimes people when they're in the system,
they may not bother to pull out even if their circumstances
have changed and that will, uh, waste a lot
of time if they are drawn
and they are, their application is processed
and then they realize actually they don't need it.
So quick answer to deal with that.
I think it's clear they will get declined
if they get selected.
I think first come first served
for the people who is waiting.
No, no, that was not my question.
My question was the waste of time.
So if they're being declined,
that means somebody has handled their application
and the time has been wasted.
Yeah. So it's when people are in the queue without
that expiring period, people may not bother to come back
and kind of informed that they do want
to be in the system for
consideration. How do we handle that?
Okay, so I get what your question, even
with the two years expire, that doesn't solve the problem
because people still don't withdraw on time.
You cannot just wait for a expire.
But also I think we should communicate better to tell people
to withdraw proactively.
That's what the principle runs in
New Zealand based on trust.
And also it should be for people doing that proactively.
Rather say what all you can have a punishment, for example,
your penalty attached with it says if you are
actually no longer eligible
but you don't withdraw waste other tax payers money
or our our money, then maybe you can just have
that thank you to make people be more responsible for the,
I think that, um, I think
that brings our time, uh, to an end.
Appreciate you taking the time to submit.
Thank you very much. Your petition. Thank you.
Thank you all. We'll report to
the health new course, I'm sure.
Thank you. Thank you.